You were born and where you spent most of your young
life. Well, my full name is Ray Ben Nesbitt. It's
not Raymond, it's not Benjamin, because we
couldn't afford all the extra letters that were
required for that. So it's very, and that's why I
said Billy Don and this was JC. And that was the way
you went by. You went by double names when I was
growing up. But I was born on a dairy farm right
outside of Marshall, about five or six miles. in a
community that was known as Bear Bottom until
1957. And they wanted some government money to put
in a water system, so they changed it to Nesbitt,
Texas. Did they really? Yeah. And that's spelled
B-E-A-R, Bear Bottom. It's B-E-A-R. Bear Creek
runs into Cypress about seven miles northwest of
Marshall. they didn't think that bare bottom
sounded like a good name to go to the government so
it's now nesbit texas and my kids stole one of the
city limit sign and it's in my den and it says nesbit
texas population 376. so it's not a very big place
in fact it's probably around 250. you still have
relatives yeah but none of my direct family or my
uncles and aunts and all those on my father's side
are all dead, and my parents are both dead. On my
mother's side, there are still her sisters and
brothers that live in that same community. We have
our own cemetery, Nesbitt Cemetery, established
in 1846. So your family got into that area in that,
really, in that time? Yeah. The two twins, Nesbitt
twins, came down to fight the Mexicans about 1836
and 1842. From Tennessee? Well, they actually,
this group came from Kentucky, and their cousins
were in Tennessee. And the ones that came down from
Kentucky, their mother... delivered Abe Lincoln
and Abe Lincoln's mother delivered the twins, the
two Nesbitt twins, Robert Nesbitt and Nathan
Nesbitt. And they came down to fight the Mexicans
and then they went back up, but then they offered
them some land, you know, a league of land for, you
know, fighting. So they came down and then
Following the Civil War, they invited their
cousins from Tennessee to come down, and that's
when my grandfather came down. He was Benjamin
Franklin Nesbitt. So the Nesbitt group has been in
that area for 150 years or so. That's an early
settlement in that part of the country. So you grew
up on a dairy farm. On a dairy farm. And you learned
to milk cows. Learned to. I had to milk cows. My
father ran a dairy for a while down in Plaquemines
Parish, Louisiana. I know where that is. Before I
came along, or about the time I came along, I guess.
That's the worst job you could possibly have. It's
seven days a week, and it starts very early, and it
goes very late, with a lot of time off in between.
And you went to school at Marshall High. Well, we
were milking cows in those days by hand because of
the... Rural electrification didn't come to that
area until about 1944. So through the third
grade... Did you use a cream separator, too? Yeah.
Through about the fourth or fifth grade, we still
were using kerosene lamps until 44 from 33, 11
years, fourth or fifth grade. So I went to school in
Marshall by bus, as everybody did in those days,
and...
I didn't take any science in high school at all. I
didn't take chemistry, physics, or any of those
because I took agriculture. It was a hell of a lot
easier. And I didn't have to have any homework. And
to get up and milk cows every morning and
afternoon, I didn't want to have any homework to
mess with. So as I said, then when I decided The last
thing I wanted to do was to grow up, I mean, to stay on
the farm. So I was going to get away from there. My
dad went through the ninth grade, eighth grade,
and my mother went through the ninth grade. And his
objective in life is he's going to send all five of
his kids to college. And he said, even if you had to
sell all the land he had. You were there when I did
that little talk up there, and he achieved his
objective. In fact, my last sister graduated in
the summer of 59, and he died in January 60. Is that
right? Yeah. That was a common objective. That's
quite an accomplishment, too, to have done it. You
have brothers and sisters? I have four sisters.
Four sisters, and you are the male of the family.
I'm the only one of the male group. I had to get a boy
dog. I have three daughters. So my mother's first
11 grandkids were all girls. Is that right? Yeah,
we just didn't have any males in the family. And you
went to Texas A&M? Yep. Why? Because you wanted to
be in agriculture? First of all, it was the
cheapest place to go. Okay. And my only contact of
any school was through the agricultural teacher.
He was a graduate of A&M. That's right. And I had
been to all the fat stock shows down in Houston. You
and Ray had a parallel career. I won the dairy
judging contest at the Houston Fat Stock Show in
1948.
But I decided that farming wasn't for me. And so
when I got to A&M, the first thing I did is I went
over. I was visiting. It was in the spring of 52. And
there were a couple other friends of mine who were
either freshmen or sophomore there. So they
invite us down for a weekend. And there were
several others who went down there. Because as it
ended up, I think out of our class, we must have had
10 or 11 boys from Marshall that went to A&M. in
1952. So I went over to the placement office and I
said, who made the most money of the graduates last
year? You really did this? How serious?
And who did you talk to in the placement office? Mr.
Heaton was running it, but I was talking to one of
his secretaries. He was still at Heaton. Yeah,
Heaton was a good guy. Homer Lloyd Heaton, he was a
good guy. So I asked, who made the most money of the
graduates last year? And they said, well, the
chemical engineers. And I said, fine, I'm going to
be a chemical engineer. And they looked at my
record, and they said, well, you can't. I said, why
is that? You haven't had any chemistry or any
physics. You've had no sciences. Well, I said,
give me a chance. So they forced me to take summer
school. I had to go to summer school to take
chemistry the first summer. before they would
agree that they let me into chemical engineering.
Needless to say, I took chemistry and I graduated
in three years with a degree in chemical
engineering. Got married the day after I got out of
high school. Oh, did you? Okay. I'm glad you asked
that question. My wife went to A&M. So you went
through A&M as a married student? Yeah. That's why
I was in a hurry. Yeah, I can understand that.
That's very formidable. That's very good. They
told me I couldn't do it, but... Did you work, have
scholarships? I borrowed money to go to school,
and so it was very cheap to go to school in those
days. It was $42 a semester, including all fees,
and it included an annual and tickets to the
football games and health insurance. That was all
for $42 a semester. Rented an apartment in...
College View, C12W. It cost $31.50 a month, all
utilities paid. So... Yeah. And your wife went to
school, too? No, she was not allowed to go to
school. That's what I was, that was my question.
She was not allowed to go to school.
And you finished in three years, so that's 55. I
started in the summer of 52, and I graduated in the
spring of 55, and
I only had to take 14 hours last semester to
graduate. I have
got approval to take... like uh physical
chemistry and chemical engineering and thermo
before i had taken physics and so i took them
simultaneously although physics is a
prerequisite for those two courses in those days
and most of the professors you had in chemical
engineering were in 200 andrews and lindsay
lindsay used to teach uh he taught about two
courses uh while i was there he He taught one
sophomore course, which was sort of an
introductory type chemical engineering, and he
taught a senior course, which was, I would call it,
what I call practical chemical engineering.
Remember? It was...
No, because one of them was that, you know, you had
a... One of the quiz questions I remember, you've
got a pile of sulfur that's so many tons, and you've
got a sulfuric acid plant that's so far away, and
how would you go about designing a process for
moving the sulfur to where you use it in the
process? And the only thing that was acceptable in
those days was a black and a wheelbarrow. That was
the only answer to the question that he would
accept. I talked to his son, Hugh. Lindsay
interviewed him, and he was talking about his dad
grading papers, and he said he had one paper, and he
still remembers his dad doing that. The student
made such a high grade that his dad sat and was
worried with that paper apparently all night long
because he just don't do that. He just wasn't
right, you know, and he really worked it through.
Yeah, he's in the book here. He said he made a
hundred, and he was determined to find something
wrong with it. Yeah, that's interesting. Andrews
was your favorite. He was the best real teacher of
any of the group. I had Bishop, I think, in one
class. People liked Bishop. He was likable, but he
wasn't that good. I don't think I ever had Holland.
I don't think I ever had Harris. His son was in our
class, Don Harris. He graduated with us. He has a
grandson. Is that right? See this one right here?
William Donald Harris Jr. Okay, let me know. He was
in the classroom. Of this group of 23, how many do
you think ended up working for Exxon?
Thirteen. Well, no, you had DuPont Shell, you had
Carbide, you had Lubrizol, you had Diamond
Alkali, you had... Houston Ship Channel was
pretty well faster than companies in those days,
but six of the 23 ended up there. Now let me ask you,
while you were in school, did you feel like you were
being pointed in any special direction as a
chemical engineer, in petroleum, in... I don't
know what. Well, at one time, I was going to take a
joint degree in petroleum engineering and
chemical engineering. Okay. So I more or less...
You assumed you would go into petroleum industry
somehow or in some capacity. Was that pretty much
the assumption within the department? Would you
say the Department of Chemical Engineering in
those days was definitely pointed toward
petroleum?
Or was pointed... Not definitely. I don't want to
be too strong. No, because, you know, we used to go
on these field trips and we went on... a trip in 54
and we went to Sea Drift and we visited Carbide's
new facility, just started up. They had an
ethylene oxide glycol, steam cracker, ethane
cracker, and they had a polyethylene. Then they
took us to
Dow and we visited their magnesium operations. At
that time, they were using these aircraft engines
for generating power. Remember those old rotary
engines? You probably don't remember that. We
also visited the Alcoa plant at Rockdale. Is that
where it was? Yes. We visited Humboldt Oil and
Refining Company, and we visited Texas City
Carbide. Now, who took you on those trips and
stuff? Well, actually, in those days, the bird dog
was Holland. He was the one that... Was he doing
that? He was doing that. He was given that
responsibility. Let's put it that way. I guess the
same thing is true for every spring and every fall.
I forgot which one. Senior class in the fall, or
vice versa. Junior class in the fall. One time, a
senior fire department had three days, and what do
y'all call it? Oh, yeah, we didn't have any. And you
met at these plants. Yep. And you were on this
channel. Yep. And there'll be some visits to the
plant. And those visits sort of influenced your
direction, or...? Do you remember anything
special about them as a consensus? Or a better
understanding of the business you were going to
get into? I had a better understanding of the type
of company I would like to work for because I
remember the guy who was the recruiter at Carbide.
His name started with an I, an Italian name, but
Ignatius or something like that. I remember the
manager at Seadrift. Marvin Eccles. He was a
fairly recent A&M graduate, I guess, when he
became manager of the Carbide plant.
But as a result, it told me who I wanted to
interview. And I interviewed Shell, Carbide,
DuPont, and Humble. And I worked the summer of 54
for Humble. And so when I interviewed, I had four
offers. I could have gone to UOP, but I said,
there's no way. Don't make me an offer. I'm not
going to Venezuela. I had no desire to want to go to,
I forgot the name of that town. Exxon had a great big
refinery in Aruba at the time. It was a part of the
Creole operation. But UOP, that's where they
started their new employees, some of these
startup sites. So I got four offers, and the lowest
offer I got was from Humble. And that's the one I
accepted. And I accepted it because the previous
summer I worked for a guy named George Mason. And to
me, he was a very, very impressive guy. And he was
the type of guy I wanted to work with. And so that's
why I accepted the job there. Because of your
previous summer? Previous summer, he'd been my
boss. So I get there in 55, and in 56, he leaves the
company and goes to work for Tenneco. And he became
the number two guy in Tenneco before he retired. I
still see him around here. He's quite an
individual.
Now, so you're coming to Houston, your first job.
What happened is I went to talk to Lindsey. And
another perception of all this was that when you
got out of school, you would stay in Texas. Yeah,
that's what I was going to tell you. I went to see
Lindsey and talked to him about a job, which, you
know, get a little counseling from him. And he
said, well, I'd go to work for any of the four except
one. He said, don't go to work for Hummel. And I
said, why? Why do you say that? Oh, he said, they
have this damn practice school down there, and
they weed out 10, 20 percent of their people every
year, you know, and they've been sort of rough on
some of my students. And I said, well, gee, my
reasoning for wanting to go was to take practice
school. I said, I've rushed through college, and I
would like to get something on what I call
applications
that would, it was a 13-week course, you know,
eight hours a day, five days a week, or 12 hours a
day, five days a week, and all of the unit
operations and the specific processes that we had
at Baytown. So I said, I looked on that as a sort of
opportunity to sort of put in place how you can go
from the theoretical to the practical. And I said,
I was leaning toward accepting the job with
Humble. I said, first of all, that's the only one of
this group where I don't think I'll ever have to
leave the state
of Texas. And what did he say to that? He didn't say
anything. You know, he's advised on this one, how
he was in the Texas locations. And then after a
couple of years, you can move them out. Wherever
you want them.
Now, so you're coming as what? What capacity? What
is your job when you're first hired? Junior
engineer. That was the lowest. And at the time, I
went to... And now are you in the office or the field
where they're putting you? Well, we had the old
main office building there at Baytown. It's been
torn down since then. But they had what was called
Tech Service Division. and it consisted of 85
chemical engineers, all chemical engineers. At
Baytown, we said there's chemical engineers and
there's other engineers. It was the way we used to
put it. And the chemical engineers made up the tech
service group, and the engineering department
consisted of all other engineers.
Of that group, when I went to work there, The first
level of supervision was called a section head.
And the most recent promotion to section head was a
guy by the name of Glenn Wilson. And he had been out
of rice since 1936. So he had been with the company
12 years before he made section head. It was a group
of pretty good quality because they'd been taking
bottom 10% out for years and years and years.
That's the only way they could continue to bring in
new blood. And so you get rid of eight to ten people a
year and you've hired ten or twelve. Some of those
had been Lindsey's people and he didn't like that.
And he didn't like that. Hamp Oliver was one in the
class before me. Pete Gola, Jerry Jenkins. I don't
know if you remember these guys or not. I don't know
Jerry Jenkins. Pat Souther.
But he didn't like the idea of the weeding people
out like that. He didn't think that was very good.
But I thought it was a pretty good approach. But you
did go through the practice school, and then you
were put in the Tech Services Division. I was in the
Tech Services Division, and you started in June.
And practice school started the first of
September and went through Christmas. And the
bottom guy in the class left. It was only 10 of us, so
even 10% won. And so with that type of weeding out
process and not forcing people to move to other
parts of Standard Oil in those days, We had a pretty
high-class organization.
From that organization came Pervin and Gertz.
They started consulting Pervin and Dallas. The
Pace Company, Payne, Askey, Service, and
Eckholm. Is that where Pace is? Okay. Yeah. Payne,
Askey, Service, and Eckholm. Bonner and Moore.
You ever hear of Bonner and Moore? I think I have.
plus a whole bunch of people. One of them was the
chairman of Continental, came out of that tech
service group. The vice president of
acquisitions for W.R. Grace came out of that
group. George Mason was the number two guy in
Tenneco. Excuse me, six of you who went into that
were Aggies. No. No. There were, in that
particular class, there were only...
One, two, three of us. Now, where are most of the
other hirees coming from? Well, one of them went on
to graduate school. Two of them went to graduate
school, John Frondley and Bob Zumwalt. They both
got a Ph.D. and then came to work for Exxon. So of the
group that went to work,
we had, there were three of us. Jack Spellings.
Spellings? Jack Spell. Spell. He was Don Harris's
best friend. They grew up in Bryan. Yeah, Jack
Spell and myself and Tom Campbell all started
immediately. John Frondlick and Bob Zumwalt came
in after they finished graduate school and Jim
Knudsen went to work for Carbide and worked for
Carbide for two years, and then came to work for
Exxon. So that was the sixth out of the 23. And where
is Exxon hiring from? The rest of the people in your
tech services division came from where? Any
concentration? Oh, we had... Rice, LSU, MIT...
From everywhere you can think of. We had MIT, we had
Texas University, LSU, Tulane, we had...
delaware wisconsin minnesota michigan yeah
obviously there's an obvious concentration uh
rice
well let's see one was from harvard business
school one was a phd out of texas one was from
oklahoma state one was from university of
oklahoma One was from
Louisiana Tech, and one was from Arkansas, and the
rest I was staying in. Now, when you start your
first job and you're looking at your peer group
there, how do you stack up with that bunch in terms
of your own comfort index, in terms of your
training? You were comfortable with what you had
been through. Oh, I thought I was as well-trained
as they were. I think that A&M's always had a very
good reputation for undergraduate training.
Always have. And I think they do a good job in that
area. And of course, from the standpoint of what
the state is expecting, that's exactly what they
want. Sure. That's exactly what they wanted. You
have to. Yeah. So you're going to be in the Tech
Services Division for how long? Well, I figure
I've got to stay there 12 years in order to get
promoted.
So I started off working in the chemicals area
because I was working on a butadiene unit and a
butyl plant. We had just acquired the butadiene
and the butyl plant from the federal government in
March of 1955, right before I showed up. And at that
point in time, we were dehydrogenated normal
butylenes. We had a process where we took the C4
strain, we used acid extraction to get
isobutylene, and that went to the butyl rubber
plane. We had an
extractive distillation process where we
separated the butylenes from the butanes, okay?
It was, we called it the GK unit, I don't know. It was
a, I forgot what kind of extractive or azeotropic
type, just a what?
And then we take the butylenes and dehydrogenate
them, you know, over the old shell 105 catalyst,
which is an iron oxide, I think. and using very high
temperature steam, 1400 degrees or something
like that. I remember that it was anytime you heard
that there was a steam leak at the dehydro unit, you
didn't walk. What you did is you got a pole and put a
rag on the end of it because you cannot see 1400
degree steam. And therefore, when the little
handkerchief disappeared, you knew where the
leak was.
So you're going to be working on your 12 years
in that unit. Well, I figure I am. But in about three
years, I'm a section unit. And the first job they
gave me was there was a guy from Arkansas that they
wanted me to get rid of. That was the first
assignment. So you get started with learning how
to deal with people. And I guess about... But
you're still in Houston. Still in Baytown. Still
in Baytown. And so this is about 1959, I guess, 58 or
59 that I become a section head. And then, you know,
things rock along. And this guy, George Mason, who
went with Tenneco, calls me up and invites me over
to see him. And he offered me the job as chief
engineer for Tenneco Orkin. So I went and visited
Chalmette, Louisiana, I think it is. And I told him
I'd give him an answer on Saturday. On Friday, They
reorganized the old tech service division and
reorganized the whole refining operation. They
split off chemicals from petroleum, where we made
two separate entities, had a chemical plant
manager and a refinery manager. And I was given the
job of technical superintendent for chemicals.
So I called Mason up to talk to him. I decided I was
going to accept the job. I called him up and he said,
I withdraw my offer.
He said, you're going to stay. That's what he told
me, you're going to stay. That was nice. That was
nice of you to do that. We've made good friends over
here. So Exxon now really is defining its mission.
I was on the committee that split chemicals from
the oil side. We divided up all the assets and
things like that. And this was in 59? 1961. 61. And
I had been on the committee to divide up assets.
They reorganized in 62, and that's when I became
the superintendent Technical Superintendent
for Chemicals. And then in 63, I got moved to New
York, working for NJ Chemical Company, running
the projects in Long Range. NJ, E-N-J-A-Y, just to
make sure. That's the way all of this, you know,
like SO. SO2. SO is Standard Oil, S-O. And NJ, New
Jersey. It was E-N-J-A-Y. So this one is S-O and
this one is N-J. That's where those two trademarks
came from. So now I'm working in New York, living in
Connecticut. And that was in 63 and in 68. Now
you're primarily, are you moving more and more in?